Add architecture document for Access Node (#867)
onflow/flow: specs/access-node-architecture/index.md

- Participates in the staked gossip network to follow protocol state
- Handling of requests to the Access API from public callers for current live spork and
    - Performs basic request validation
    - Delegates script execution to upstream Execution Nodes
    - Delegates transactions to Collection Nodes for processing by the network

Script execution delegation to ENs is an obvious low hanging fruit limiting Access Node scalability and impacting transaction throughput capacity. In addition, scaling of Access API request handling is constrained by tight coupling of code within Access Node. The introduction of the DPS took the first step towards queryable locally held state that could be leveraged to scale Access Node. Subsequently, execution state sync provided a decentralized way to share execution state across the network. 

## Revised ownership and responsibility

By managing all chain synchronization concerns `Blockchain Data Service` provides a unified set of functionality that `Access Node` and `Observer Service` are built on, and which can be used as a standalone component for following trusted chain state more generally.

> ### Blockchain Core service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Blockchain Data Service
```

- Follows protocol consensus and execution state sync
- Serves the `State Streamer API`
- Serves the `Protocol API`

The new `Access Node` builds on the original node capabilities above: 
### Access Node

- Participates as a *staked* node within the Flow network

> - Maintains sync using `Blockchain Data Service`

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't sound entirely accurate to me. The Access Node doesn't really "use" the Blockchain Data Service, because it *is* the Blockchain Data Service

Author: ```suggestion
- Stays up to date with protocol state and execution data
```

- Accepts new transactions, validates them, and forwards them to collection nodes.
- Bridges the staked and public libp2p networks
    - Provides access to the Flow blockchain’s protocol and execution state via a public libp2p network that exposes the state sync and execution data sync protocols.
    - Relays a subset of messages from the staked network to the public network

`Observer Service` is named as such due to its non-participation in the protocol
### Observer Service

- Participates in the Flow network as a consumer of public data without being staked or permissioned

> - Maintains sync using `Blockchain Data Service`

Reviewer: same here

Author: ```suggestion
- Stays up to date with protocol state and execution data
```

- If `DPS` is deployed, it queries `DPS API` for execution state queries, otherwise returns an error.
- Queries the downstream `Protocol API` on a node running `Blockchain Data Service` for protocol state
- Proxies send transaction requests
    - `Access Nodes` proxy transactions to the downstream `Protocol API`
    - `Observer Services` proxy transactions to a downstream `Access Node`

`DPS` has two limited changes proposed: extraction of consensus follower into `Blockchain Data Service`. Then deprecating GCP based execution state sync and switching all chain sync logic over to `State Streamer`. 

### Data Provisioning Service (DPS)

- Deployed as a stand-alone set of services
- Connects to an `Access Node` or `Observer Service` using the `State Streamer`
- Uses `State Streamer API` to subscribe to protocol and execution state updates

### State Streamer and Streamer Registration API

- Provides an API for subscribing to protocol and execution state updates
- Served using 1:1 communication (likely gRPC over web sockets)
- Permissioned (not intended to be exposed to the public)
- Provides an abstraction layer so clients don’t need to interact with the Flow network directly

> - The API accesses data from the `Execution Data Service` and `Protocol State Service`

Reviewer: I updated the diagram to use "Module" instead of "Service" because service suggests a separate process, so we should also change that here

Author: ```suggestion
- The API accesses data from the `Execution Data Module` and `Protocol State Module`
```

# Detail level objectives

- The handling of received raw protocol and execution state data is managed in the `Blockchain Data Service`. This state is provided to callers via the `Protocol API` and streamed to consumers of the `State Streamer`.
- `Blockchain Data Service` state is accessed using `State Streamer Registration API` and via `State Streamer` clients.
- `DPS` indexes execution state that has been delivered live from the protocol by `State Streamer`. The indexed state is used to answer script execution requests from the `DPS API`.

# Design

![architecture.jpg](images/architecture.jpg)

# In detail

To date the implementation of the Access Node has provided the following: 

- Participates as a *staked* node within the Flow network
- Participates in the private gossip network to follow protocol state
- Enforces rate limits and throttling of requests
- Handling of requests to the Access API from public callers for current live spork and
    - Performs basic request validation
    - Delegates script execution to upstream Execution Nodes
    - Delegates transactions to Collection Nodes for processing by the network

> Script execution delegation to ENs is an obvious low hanging fruit limiting Access Node scalability and impacting transaction throughput capacity. In addition, scaling of Access API request handling is constrained by tight coupling of code within Access Node. The introduction of the DPS took the first step towards queryable locally held state that could be leveraged to scale Access Node, initially for protocol state only. Subsequently execution state sync provided the missing piece of the blockchain sync story. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Script execution delegation to ENs is an obvious low hanging fruit limiting Access Node scalability and impacting transaction throughput capacity. In addition, scaling of Access API request handling is constrained by tight coupling of code within Access Node. The introduction of the DPS took the first step towards queryable locally held state that could be leveraged to scale Access Node. Subsequently, execution state sync provided a decentralized way to share execution state across the network. 
```

## Revised ownership and responsibility

By managing all chain synchronization concerns `Blockchain Data Service` provides a unified set of functionality that `Access Node` and `Observer Service` are built on, and which can be used as a standalone component for following trusted chain state more generally.

### Blockchain Core service

- Follows protocol consensus and execution state sync
- Serves the `State Streamer API`
- Serves the `Protocol API`

The new `Access Node` builds on the original node capabilities above: 
### Access Node

- Participates as a *staked* node within the Flow network
- Maintains sync using `Blockchain Data Service`
- Accepts new transactions, validates them, and forwards them to collection nodes.
- Bridges the staked and public libp2p networks

>     - Provides access to the flow blockchain’s protocol and execution state via a public libp2p network that exposes the state sync and execution data sync protocols.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Provides access to the Flow blockchain’s protocol and execution state via a public libp2p network that exposes the state sync and execution data sync protocols.
```

    - Relays a subset of messages from the staked network to the public network

> `Observer Service` is named as such due to it’s non-participation in the protocol

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Observer Service` is named as such due to its non-participation in the protocol
```

### Observer Service

> - Participates in the flow network as a consumer of public data without being staked or permissioned

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Participates in the Flow network as a consumer of public data without being staked or permissioned
```

### Flow API Service

- Deployed as a stand-alone service
- Exposes the external Flow `Access API`s (gRPC/REST)
- If `DPS` is deployed, it queries `DPS API` for execution state queries, otherwise returns an error.
- Queries the downstream `Protocol API` on a node running `Blockchain Data Service` for protocol state
- Proxies send transaction requests
    - `Access Nodes` proxy transactions to the downstream `Protocol API`
    - `Observer Services` proxy transactions to a downstream `Access Node`

`DPS` has two limited changes proposed: extraction of consensus follower into `Blockchain Data Service`. Then deprecating GCP based execution state sync and switching all chain sync logic over to `State Streamer`. 

### Data Provisioning Service (DPS)

- Deployed as a stand-alone set of services
- Connects to an `Access Node` or `Observer Service` using the `State Streamer`
- Uses `State Streamer API` to subscribe to protocol and execution state updates

### State Streamer and Streamer Registration API

- Provides an API for subscribing to protocol and execution state updates
- Served using 1:1 communication (likely gRPC over web sockets)

> - Permissioned (not intended to be exposed to the public, but also not authenticated)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Permissioned (not intended to be exposed to the public)
```

- The `State Streamer` interface is a generic component which can allow any consumer, such as the `DPS`, to access the state tracked by the `Blockchain Data Service`.

# Non-goals

- Does not address long term historical access (see additional questions)
- Does not address operational issues for public node operators (rate-limiting, access control etc)

# Detail level objectives

- The handling of received raw protocol and execution state data is managed in the `Blockchain Data Service`. This state is provided to callers via the `Protocol API` and streamed to consumers of the `State Streamer`.
- `Blockchain Data Service` state is accessed using `State Streamer Registration API` and via `State Streamer` clients.
- `DPS` indexes execution state that has been delivered live from the protocol by `State Streamer`. The indexed state is used to answer script execution requests from the `DPS API`.

# Design

![architecture.jpg](images/architecture.jpg)

# In detail

To date the implementation of the Access Node has provided the following: 

- Participates as a *staked* node within the Flow network
- Participates in the private gossip network to follow protocol state

> - Enforces rate limits and throttling of requests

Author: hmm -- I guess I wonder why we have this line here at all? Tempted to just remove

> - Enforces rate limits and throttling of requests

Reviewer 2: yea, let's remove it. The next bullet covers the important parts

> - Enforces rate limits and throttling of requests

Author: ```suggestion
```

- Handling of requests to the Access API from public callers for current live spork and
    - Performs basic request validation
    - Delegates script execution to upstream Execution Nodes
    - Delegates transactions to Collection Nodes for processing by the network

Script execution delegation to ENs is an obvious low hanging fruit limiting Access Node scalability and impacting transaction throughput capacity. In addition, scaling of Access API request handling is constrained by tight coupling of code within Access Node. The introduction of the DPS took the first step towards queryable locally held state that could be leveraged to scale Access Node, initially for protocol state only. Subsequently execution state sync provided the missing piece of the blockchain sync story. 

## Revised ownership and responsibility

By managing all chain synchronization concerns `Blockchain Data Service` provides a unified set of functionality that `Access Node` and `Observer Service` are built on, and which can be used as a standalone component for following trusted chain state more generally.

> 

Reviewer 3: There are a large chunk of sections missing below this. If you did a PDF export of the doc it will not work because of a bug in Notion. The major sections have the breakdown of role/responsibility per component and should not be left out. Thanks

Author: I did the Markdown export... and you're rioght I'm seeing that now. I'll add them back in.

The new `Access Node` builds on the original node capabilities above: 

`Observer Service` is named as such due to it’s non-participation in the protocol

`DPS` has two limited changes proposed: extraction of consensus follower into `Blockchain Data Service`. Then deprecating GCP based execution state sync and switching all chain sync logic over to `State Streamer`. 

# Refactoring detailed diagrams
### Starting Point
![refactor-0.png](images/refactor-0.png)

### Refactor Step 1

> ![refactor-1.png](images/refactor-1.png)

Reviewer 3: There's some bullets inline below this graphic in Notion that hasn't made it into this doc.

### Build `Blockchain Core Service`
![refactor-2.png](images/refactor-2.png)

### Build `Flow API Service`
![refactor-3.png](images/refactor-3.png)

# Additional questions

- Historical access

>     - This re-architecture does not support historical state since consensus follower is a live only concept. But this remains one of the most often mentioned requests.

Reviewer 3: We might want to reword this for the public - "While this re-architecture doesn't support access to historical state directly in this initial architecture revision, it makes support possible in future and we are working with community partners to achieve this"

>     - This is also something we are hoping via Optakt in the longer term.

Reviewer 3: We should drop this line for public

>     - Effectively on ice.

Reviewer 3: Should drop this too, assuming we go with the revised first bullet

### Original diagrams

> Refactoring Phases: [https://app.diagrams.net/#G11AK8xmHLoiY0IfD2aZoWwvzi_5hVfm2r](https://app.diagrams.net/#G11AK8xmHLoiY0IfD2aZoWwvzi_5hVfm2r)

Reviewer 3: Prob should drop this and the title above, it's not something we need to share externally.
